From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 68. Accorded Thursday,
June 14th, 2007. Support for Hanselman minutes
is provided by Tellerik rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
Support is also provided by
slash end software red carpet
subscriptions. The most comprehensive solution
for adding connectivity to your
dot Benton asp.net applications. With
components of every major internet
protocol online@wwwdotandsoftwaredotcomandby.net developers journal the
world's leading dotnet developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott and Carl discuss orcas
dynamic languages and other topics
with Patrick Caldwell. Hi, this is
Carl Franklin. You're listening to Hansel
minutes from Hanselman it's dot
com. Scott is joining me
this week with a special
guest. Hi Scott. Hey Carl,
how's it going? I'm doing
fine. You were shocked there
because I asked you how
you're doing because that wastes
the viewer's time. See, at
this point I an ordinary
podcast, I would ask you
how your weekend was, but
we're not going to do
that here on Hanselman. It's
I don't care. I'm here
with Patrick Caldwell. Patrick Caldwell is my
right hand, man. My tattoos
to my mr. Rourke. He
is, he is, he's a,
he's the architect here on
our next generation banking system.
Okay. And we're going to
be talking about orcas. So
we'll call this the orcas
overview show. Excellent. Welcome Patrick.
Thanks Carl. We talked a
little bit about our original
banking system here and how
it's kind of a hybrid
and it's based on.net one,
one, but there's some C
plus plus in there. And
Patrick is designing along with
a number of folks over
here at Karelian now division
of CheckFree the next generation
system. And it's going to
be based on, I guess
they're calling it now.net three,
five. That's the official title,
right? Right. And we're using
a whole host of technologies
within that. It's probably worth
for a second demystifying, the
kind of mess that is
the.net framework numbering system. I'm
sure that you've had a
little trouble with this yourself.
Right? Carl. I mean the
whole thing about.net three O
not really being a new
framework, but just being additional
features, you know, sort of
has thrown the whole well,
you know, it's what happens
when marketing people get involved
in, in naming decisions For
versions of that, that should
normally be left up to
the scientists. Right. And then
what is.net three, five, right,
right. Remembering, remembering that all
of this is based on
the two Oh CLR. Yup.
And then orcas is the
code name for visual studio
2008. Right. So I feel
that there's a lot of
good stuff. That's not being,
not being expressed because people
are confused. People are not
clear on exactly what is
orcas, what is three, five?
And they were kind of
saying, well, what's the point?
What is this next new
thing? So at lunch today,
I mentioned this to Patrick
and I said, you know
what? What's the big deal.
Orcas is what, and, and
you said I've sort of
been downplaying while link. Okay,
great. It's data. I think
that, that there's a lot
more to link than just
the database part and that
some of the changes that
they've had to make to
the framework and to the
compiler to support link, I
think will be a lot
of huge value to us
going forward without necessarily having
direct bearing on data access.
So you see how Patrick
went directly to link on
an orifice question? Well, let
me know. That's, that's the
big news, right? I mean,
link is the major feature
that we have in this
new version of.net, right? It
is a, I mean, it's,
it's the one that stands
out, but I think there's
a lot of the underpinnings
in C-sharp three Oh. That
they had to change to
make link work that will
end up being at least
as important, if not more
interesting than the actual link
part. Okay. So how many
different things are required to
make this work? I mean,
we all understand dotnet to,
Oh, we're going to send
the.net CLR that done a
two O type system. We
know that visual studio, 2005
targets two Oh that you
can't target one, one without
adding stuff to visual studio,
2000 and five.net three O
was really a series of
libraries that augmented.net to, Oh,
those libraries being the w
question Mark F stack to
be PF WCF. Right. And
then.net three, five is still
the.net two O CLR. It's
a new visual studio and
it is a new C-sharp
compiler and a new visual
basic compiler. Is that right,
Patrick? Yeah, That is correct.
And there, and there's also
been some additional library changes
around that. The w question
Mark F stack. So there's
some new silver, which is
the integration between a WCF
and windows workflow, which also
we're looking to take advantage
of. So has the base
class library changed has my
system dot collections and those
kinds of things changed. I
mean, there are some additions,
but the fundamentals haven't changed
at all. So there's been
a versioning stuff, versioning changes,
but there's nothing like I'm
going to find more things
marked obsolete. I don't think
so. The, you know, there
may be some minor changes.
I think there certainly are
mostly going to be additions
rather than any breaking changes,
but that does bring up
though. I mean, it is
additionally confusing. The picture that
when you look at the
assembly versions on an Orca
system, some of the base
class framework assemblies are still
version two. Oh. And some
of them are three O
and now some of them
will be three, five. So
it's really all, you're running
this whole stack of things
that at different version level,
But right now it seems
like that's just an issue
of the beta. I mean,
ultimately the version numbers will
all sync up. When I
put this on a system
and I deploy to a
system, what do they require?
Like, I understand if I
want to put Dutton at
two on a system, I
need to put the done
at two O runtime. If
I use WCF WPF type
libraries, I need to put
the done at three O
quote unquote runtime, not a
very good word for it.
They're not that.net three O
libraries. What do I need
to do to, to take
an orcas application to a
non orcas prepared system, Then
you'd have to install the
three, five, I guess, you
know, runtime, or Is there
one yet? I don't know
if there's a separate installer
outside of visual studio, 2008
right now, but I haven't
looked So presumably there'll be
a similar three, five. And
so now it's going to
be, do you know if
it will be a stack?
I haven't figured this out.
Like, can I get three,
five by just running one
installer? Or do I have
to go and do the
dance of stacking installers? I
think if, if three O
is a precedent, then three,
five should be the same.
And that you'll just run
the one installer and it'll
install the two old runtime
and the three old libraries
and then presumably any additional
three-five stuff. Okay. So back
to the compiler thing, which
I think is the most
significant kind of part that
people have trouble with, at
least the people that I'm
talking to is the idea
that there are two different
C-sharp compilers on an Orca
system. When you say file
new within visual studio, 2008
in that dialog box for
a new project, there's an
option in the upper right
corner that says which framework
version do you want to
target? And that sets the
whole system up, that sets
up your whole project for
specific compilers specific libraries with
which you'll get different syntax,
checking, different IntelliSense, completely different
environment. So it's the first
visual studio that lets you
target more than one version
of the framework in a
supported way. When I say
in a supported way, I
mean that, there's a thing
called MSB, the Microsoft, the
build Everett environment, which let
you target one, one under
visual studio, 2005, but it
wasn't exactly a supported thing.
It was more of kind
of a fun thing that
would give you a hybrid,
but this is the a
formal change. It seems on
the part of the visual
studio team to say we
will support all three of
these targeted environments. Yeah. I
think it becomes a little
easier though, because they're, since
they're all targeting the same
runtime, you know, unlike with
MSP stuff, you're really targeting
a two or a one,
one runtime with this year,
you're targeting one CLR, right.
There's only one, two Oh
runtime. And so that the
switch is really just setting
up, which C-sharp compiler am
I going to use and
which set of libraries in
my right. My referencing the
two old version of system,
not a, you know, collections,
or is it the three
or the three, five version.
So really when, and then
this really kind of underscores
the, the version number and
confusion. I mean, there's, it's
all.net with some different libraries
and as just one more
number and confusion, the new
compiler is called C-sharp three
Oh, which is coming out
with the three, five runtime
and which didn't ship with
the, you know, three O
runtime that included, you know,
WCF and WPF at, which
makes sense. If you view
that independently, since it's a
new ECMO spec, they went
from a C sharp, you
know, two Oh to C-sharp
three hours, the name of
the spec, but it didn't
ship with three. Oh. So,
and that just adds one
more point of confusion. I
just like to think that
with orcas, it's next gen
C sharp, and that's kind
of simple, that's a simple
sentence kind of way of
doing it, but it's how
I deal with all the
different version numbering. So what
kind of improvements in C-sharp
have we been using so
far? We see that, is
it linked primarily Lincoln? The
stuff that surrounds it? So,
I mean, that there's stuff
that they enabled in the
compiler to make link work
like Lambda expressions and like
anonymous types. And some of
the new stuff that really
went into the language to
make link work are interesting
languages features, you know, in
and of themselves. So a
couple of weeks ago, you,
you add a blog post
about the, the Ruby syntax
being more natural, where you
could say, you know, 20
minutes ago, well, you can
do that same, essentially the,
exactly the same syntax using
the new C-sharp compiler because
of extension methods and that
same sort of anonymous types
and facilitate a lot of
that. Patrick, the DLR, the
dynamic language run time. This
is not coming in the
orcas timeframe. Right. I believe
that that's true. Yeah. And
the thing that's interesting about
the DLR is it is
a library, a series of
libraries. So it's something that
you could choose to redistribute
and have them be private
libraries, private assemblies to your
application. So it's not necessarily
something that you need to
get, you don't necessarily make
it a shared assembly. Patrick,
what about visual basic? You've
been talking about C sharp
three. Oh, quite a bit.
There are a few features
in a C-sharp tooo that
we would like to have
had in VB. And the,
the one that I keep
coming back to is yield.
Do you know anything about
that? Are we finally getting
yield in VB? I, you
know, I think I saw
something related to that, but
honestly, I, I don't track
the, the VB spec very
well, so, well, maybe you
can explain what yield means
to the C-sharp program. So
a yield was a new.net
through to, Oh, I guess,
keyword that allows you to
do very simple returning enumerators,
right? So you can in
a loop, just say for
each time through the loop
yield, a return value of
this, and the compiler will
take of turning that into
something that is IEnumerable and
return Collection. And basically yield
goes back to the caller
and, and sends that item
back to the caller as
if it were part of
a collection. Right. Very, very
cool stuff. Now, I wonder
about this and I'm just
kind of like musing here.
I don't necessarily have a
conclusion, but I wonder to
ask both you guys for
the average, Joe, the average
programmer, these new features, how
much of a mind shift
does it take for these
new features for them to
start using it? Are these
the kind of language features
where it's like, Oh, there
was a vacuum. I needed
this and now it's there
when I need it. Or
we've been using the existing
language so long that we'll
continue to forget that yield
is there, forget that anonymous
classes are there, you know,
there's kind of, there's a
couple different kinds of programmers.
I think that there's those
that are clamoring for the
new language features and are
going to go, ah, it
could become so much more
elegant now that I have
this. And then there are
those who will continue to
forget that they're available and
not use them at all.
What do you think, Scott?
I think what you're going
to see is just like
we had with generics in
2.0, people really didn't know
that they could do it
any other way. And so
we're perfectly happy coming down
to the computers level and
programming without generics all these
years and generic show up
and we start using them
all over the place. And
wow. Finally, you know, there's
a whole lot of work
that we don't have to
do. That's good. And I
think the same thing will
happen with link, especially that
it'll open up new possibilities
of the way that we
can write code that, you
know, once we get over
the learning curve and we
start utilizing it a little
bit more, we won't want
to go back to doing
things the old way. Yeah.
And there, there are some
other new features in the,
in the C-sharp compiler that
I haven't been getting a
lot of press because there
aren't directly related to link,
but there's got some new
stuff around object and collection
initializers that are, it's a
much, much more compact syntax.
So for example, when you
do a new on a
customer object, just like we've
always had with attribute declarations.
Now I can say, you
know, new customer open-close Perin
and then give a named
list of parameters that I
want to initialize. So you
can just like with the
attributes syntax, I can say,
you know, new customer open-close
per in first name equals
Joe last name equals Smith,
and have that in a
very concise syntax as part
of the object initializer, which
is a new feature that
it has gone, you know,
rather overlooked, but it just
makes the code that much
cleaner. And similarly there's a
new collection initializer so you
can initialize anything. That's IEnumerable
the same way that you
did with the previous C-sharp
array syntax. So the new
constructor syntax kind of obviates
the need for 20 different
overloaded kind of basic Instructors
whose only job it is,
is to take a parameter
and stick it into a
member variable. Right? Let's face
it. That's, you know, that's
just busy work for most,
most people, unless you actually
need to hook those things
in a different way in
the constructor, which you in
what you do in the,
in the setters. But typically
that's not a good idea
anyway. Right? So it's, you
know, it's an example of,
you know, it's not a
beautiful new language feature maybe,
but it's, it goes, it's
that much closer to reducing
the amount of code that
monkeys could write that we
have to take care of
ourselves After all that's the
goal is to find, to
find ways to get monkeys,
to write code that's the
goal. Ultimately, I think that
we all wish that monkeys
would write code. Now, the,
the link stuff, I know
that it's kind of, it
feels kind of strange when
you start writing link D
link X-linked type code, because
it's not in a string
we've spent so many years
writing one language, be that
VB or Xi sharp, and
then tunneling other languages inside
of strings. You know what
I'm saying? You, you tunnel
in regular expressions, you tunnel
in X path, you tunnel
in CQL. These are all
chunks of other languages that
we kind of met up
program and express in strings.
And the compiler has no
idea that those things exist.
And every once in a
while, someone will write a
cool add in. That'll let
you peek inside those strings
and do some rudimentary syntax
checking when those, those quotes,
those double quotes are removed
and suddenly those big green
strings that used to be
syntax highlighted as a string,
become a part of the
language. It seems of kind
of creepy. At least to
me, it seems kind of
hard to get used to
how is the system aware
of all that information? That
seems like all this new
knowledge that it knows about.
It knows about the database
you're getting IntelliSense, right? Patrick
on tables. Where did it
find out what table you
were talking about? How did
it know about this stuff?
So that with, with objects.
So the stuff that I've
played around with Moses, the
link to object stuff, and
there, obviously the compiler is
taking care of it with
the link to SQL stuff.
You do have to take
the step of building some,
you know, entities that the
compiler will know about that
look like your database. So,
you know, it is a
little strange and the syntax
is, has ended up being
a little different than SQL.
When you look at it,
for example, you start with
a foresee in customers. And
then the end of this
statement says what you're actually
selecting. So you do foresee
and customers where C is,
you know, named dot Fred
select C. So the syntax
is a little different from
SQL, which, you know, may,
I don't think is a
huge problem, what that facilitates
so is in TeleSign. So
I think the first time
somebody gets real IntelliSense over
their set based queries. They'll
they'll over look the weirdness
and embrace the new features
and you don't have to
regenerate these things. I mean,
this is part of the
system now, right? You don't
have to go and say
the database has changed. How
does it do, do you
have to do that? I
think that you would, I
haven't, I haven't tried it
myself, but I think that
you would have to go
and regenerate those things. If
the database has changed Here
at Kirlian, we have a
little bit different situation because
our web servers don't talk
directly to the database. We've
got a true three tier
and multilayered system such that
the web server talks to
an application server, passing objects,
data, transfer objects, back and
forth. And then that application
server talks directly to the
database. So a lot of
the work that we do
is running around with objects
and we don't really know
where they came from. We
don't see that the database
got involved, but I do
know that in large systems
like this, we spend a
lot of time marshaling between
type systems. We dance a
lot between the, you know,
SQL date, time, XML, date,
time, and the base class
library, date time, how does
link or dealing deal with
this, this constant marshaling of
data between three different type
systems? Right. Well, my impression
is, and again, I haven't
spent a lot of time
with the link to SQL
stuff, but that essentially all
that's going to get normalized
into two CLRN time types
so that the underlying link
infrastructure is taken care of
that stuff for you. So
you can just worry about
the C-sharp constructs and not
worry about the underlying data
types. So that makes the
base class library kind of
system dot ant system dot
daytime makes those the first
among equals in this instance,
because they're kind of the
controller in this, in this
kind of triumvirate of data
types, there was relationship between
the XML data types, SQL
data types, the base class
library then becomes the first.
Yeah. And I think that's
the way it should be.
Right. I mean, the average
C-sharp programmer doesn't need to
know that there's any difference
between a, you know, DB
no, and a no value
for an object, right. I
mean, that's just trivia. And
again, you know, that's, we're
back to the code that
monkeys can ride, right? Nobody
wants to, to have to
check every single value to
see if it should be
cast as a DB Knoll
instead of a null object.
That's, you know, it's just
busy work In your, in
your work so far. Have
you felt that the code
you're writing is less tedious?
You know, that kind of
like repetitive stuff? I think
so. And I think that
that will, because some of
the new language features that
that'll continue to be the
case. And, you know, we
want to in the same
way that we're starting to
take it more advantage of
the underlying platform features rather
than writing some code ourselves,
you know, we want to
spend less time doing busy
work and more time writing
banking software. And that, you
know, if we, every line
of code that I don't
have to type, you know,
tap out to, to cast
something to DB Noel is
time spent solving banking problems.
Yeah. That's definitely one of
the things that we focus
on here is just trying
to do things that are
in our industry. In our
case, we're in banking. In
your case, whoever you are
a dear listener, you might
be an insurance or whatever,
but you know, like a
lot, one of the first
things that I ever did
here at Kirlian, like six
years ago. So when we
started doing.net, as someone came
up and asked me how
to parse a date time,
they were running around doing
like an install or something
on a string to parse
out the date time. I
was just really shocked because
it was like, don't you
think someone has cracked the
date time parsing problem. Could
we move up, move up
a layer of abstraction. And
we're constantly trying to build
those layers of abstraction, such
that the system we are
building on top of looks
more like the business problem,
right. And less like the
tedium. You know, I'd like
to think about accounts and
pays and payments rather than
even thinking about date times
and things like that. So
hopefully that's the direction that
things are heading. Is there
a sense that C sharp
three O is, is more
dynamic because there's a sense
that visual basic 10 DBX,
maybe 10 it's like OSX
VBX, BB vigil, basic 10
is kind of reinventing itself
or not reinventing itself, but
let's say reasserting its heritage
as a dynamic language. I
know that you can do
type inference in C sharp
three, but type inference does
not dynamic language make. I
think when you put together
things like extension methods, anonymous
types and the type inference
of the new bar data
type, you get a lot
closer to being a dynamic
language without it's obviously not
as clean as syntax, right?
So you're not going to
have the necessarily the syntactic
goodness of something like Ruby,
but you'll have a lot
of those same features. So
it may not look quite
the same, but you know,
the language does facilitate more
of that dynamic behavior, Looking
at things from a larger,
a larger scope, more historical
scope looking back is if
you think about last 30,
30, 40 years of programming
and how that dynamic language
walks kind of say that
it's a resurgence of dynamic
languages, is there a sense
that maybe we never left
and this whole kind of
C thing was just a
quick jaunt and I'll often
to a dead end or
a call to sack. And
oops, didn't really mean to
be that static. Let's head
back to, to list let's,
let's all be lispy again.
I mean, it's kind of
a religious issue, but the,
you know, I'm a statically
typed language fan myself. I'm
still not totally bought off
on the whole dynamic types
thing. So I mean, the
fact that we can facilitate
the programming model we want
and come closer to expressing
coder intent in our C-sharp
three O code and still
get the benefits of compile
time type checking. You know,
that that's where I'd like
to see it go. I'm
still a little nervous about,
you know, dynamic types and,
and some of the less
strongly type stuff. So it's
nice to, I think a
lot of the proponents of
dynamic languages, what they really
want is I want my
code to express my intent
without having to write a
bunch of other junk in
the middle. Exactly. If we
can get closer to that
and still have compiled time
type checking, that makes me
happy. Now, when you say
compile time type checking, we
did a little bit of
talk on dynamic languages. A
couple of shows ago, someone
wrote in and mentioned that
there was a thing I
thought it was called auto
test. I might be getting
this wrong. Someone can correct
me, but basically it was
a Ruby, a test engine
that would constantly run your
application. So basically if you
think about what compile time
type checking is doing, right,
it's doing an almost run
to make sure that things
are cool because ultimately you
don't know how this thing
runs until it runs. So
a dynamic environment could make
up for not having compile
time type checking by using
those background cycles to simply
have the thing run constantly.
Well, we have that in
visual basic, it's called the
background compiler, Right? And, and,
and it, it breaks down
at some point, whether it
be a thousand project, you
know, somebody always comes up
with an email and they'll
say, Hey, I have a
thousand projects into one solution.
And background compilation is slow
on my system. Why do
you think that is, That's
going to be the case,
no matter what kind of
background checking you have, if
you've got that many, The
size becomes a problem, but
you're absolutely right. That that
is probably one of the
things that's going to allow
visual basic 10 to begin
to succeed as a dynamic
language, because they're going to
give people that sense upfront.
I would also add Scott
that those, you know, thousand
projects solutions are very rare
and that most development is
done within the scope of
something that the background compiler
can handle very well. Absolutely.
Yeah, that's true. I was
just bringing that up as
an edge case. That's true.
I think it's interesting to
look at the idea of,
well, let's run it all
the time and keep it
running and ma and make
up for anything that might
be gained by an upfront
compilation. I'll tell you. That's
one of the reasons that
I haven't fully gone over
to C sharp yet is
because that background compiler is
wonderful. And you know, you
use that for a while
and it's damn nice. I
don't know. It's And the
religious arguments continue. I think
that's probably a good place
to start. Let's see if
we can get Andrews to
come on the show and
tell us what direction he's
taking. C-sharp FORO No, it's
not a, it's not a
big religion thing. The religious
Wars are over, you know,
it's just a matter of
what works best for the
job and what, what, you
know, the trade offs are
already there. Everybody knows the
issues. It's it's Ultimately we
just want to do good
work, get our jobs done
and write in a language
that makes us feel good.
Exactly. Pick the, pick the
shoe that fits. Cool. Well,
thanks Patrick, for taking the
time out of your lunch
hour to come in and,
and do a show with
me. And that's our show
for today. I think girl.
Yes, it is. Thank you,
Patrick. Thank you, Scott. And
thank you for listening and
we'll see you next week
on Hanselman. It's.